GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The
first primary election is here.
New Hampshire
casts its vote on a fateful day
for presidential
hopefuls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Tuesday, we
talk with Mark Shields, David
Brooks, and
our politics duo, Amy Walter and
Tamara Keith,
to analyze the state of the race
for the White
House.
GWEN IFILL: And tens of
thousands of Syrians
flee toward the Turkish border,
as the city
of Aleppo turns into a
battlefield.
WOMAN (through translator): We
are dying.
We are left with nothing but our
clothes.
We want to be at ease. We want
our dignity.
It's been five years of living
under bombs,
crying, "Oh, God."
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The months of
campaigning and
the endless TV ads have all come
to a close
today in New Hampshire. This
primary day means
voters finally have to decide
who wins, and
the losers have to decide
whether to go on.
Our political director, Lisa
Desjardins, is
in New Hampshire, where she has
watched the
day's events.
LISA DESJARDINS: The campaign
buses rolled
across the Granite State one
last time, and
candidates made one last push to
sway possible
supporters. Many of those voters
admitted
they were last-minute deciders.
JODY MCINTYRE, New Hampshire
Voter: I just
got out of my car and I said,
oh, my God,
who am I going to vote for? Who
am I going
to vote for?
LISA DESJARDINS: For others, it
was more excitement
than angst in their initial
experience with
the first-in-the-nation primary.
MAN: Hey, we got a first-time
voter.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WOMAN: I don't know. I just felt
that it's
time for me to become an
American citizen.
It's my right. So I'm doing it.
LISA DESJARDINS: And what a
state to have
that right.
WOMAN: I know. Live free or die.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Glad you're out so early.
LISA DESJARDINS: For the
candidates, it's
more about living to fight on.
Hillary Clinton
ventured into a frosty
Manchester morning
to keep volunteers' spirits up
with a selfie
or two, and promised her team
won't quit.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We're
going to keep
working literally until every
last vote is
cast and counted.
LISA DESJARDINS: Rival Bernie
Sanders was
also out, urging along
supporters outside
a polling site in Nashua.
Among Republicans, Marco Rubio
drew a largely
friendly crowd at a polling
site, but a few
detractors as well. One showed
up in a robot
costume, a pointed reminder of
criticism that
Rubio came off too programmed in
last Saturday's
debate.
At a later stop, the candidate
made clear
he won't be deterred, regardless
of tonight's
result.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
And then going to South Carolina
and continue
to build, and -- as we get into
the other
states.
LISA DESJARDINS: Some of his
rivals, too,
insisted they're staying in the
race.
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie:
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
I will see you in South
Carolina.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ohio Governor
John Kasich:
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, we're going to South
Carolina.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GOV. JOHN KASICH: We will be
fine.
LISA DESJARDINS: And former
Florida Governor
Jeb Bush:
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: This
is a long, long process, and a
lot of things
can happen in a very volatile
year. So, you're
going to see me.
DONALD TRUMP (R), presidential
candidate:
Thank you. Thank you very much.
I appreciate
it.
LISA DESJARDINS: The man they
have all been
chasing, Donald Trump, had a
light schedule
today. And in the end, some who
voted today
said it wasn't about the
outcome, but about
savoring a unique day in
democracy.
FRAN WHITAKER, New Hampshire
Voter: That's
the most important. It's almost
less important
who wins than that people just
exercise their
right to vote.
LISA DESJARDINS: From New
Hampshire, the Democratic
race moves on to the Nevada
caucuses on February
20. The next Republican primary,
that's in
South Carolina the same day.
But, of course, we're still
waiting to see
what happens this day. And one
factor always
is turnout. I have to say, Judy,
the secretary
of state, Bill Gardner, of New
Hampshire expects
a heavy turnout. It's been
steady at the polls,
but there's about 900,000
registered voters
in New Hampshire. The secretary
of state expects
500,000 of them to have come out
today -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can just feel
the excitement
all the way here in Washington.
So, Lisa, you were out today at
polling places
talking to voters. What are they
saying to
you?
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, there
were some
of the storylines we have been
reporting on.
I talked to many Donald Trump
voters today,
and they told me to a person
that they are
not just voting in protest, that
they do believe
Donald Trump could be a strong
president.
I asked them even further, Judy,
what do you
make of the fact that some
people say they're
offended by Donald Trump, they
think that
he sort of is too loose of a
cannon? They
said they know that that's true,
but they're
willing to take that risk
because they think
America is in such a weak
position, that they
want a leader like Donald Trump.
So, that certainly was something
I came across
at the polls. What surprised me
the most,
two other Republicans, I heard
the name Jeb
Bush more than I expected, and
also a lot
of John Kasich, which we have
been talking
about before. The Jeb Bush
voters I talked
to seemed to be people who had
been kind of
having a tough decision between
Bush, Kasich
and Christie.
And in this last weekend and
even one of them
today in the hour that he voted
decided to
go with Jeb Bush. He said he
felt that Jeb
Bush was the most presidential,
someone who
stood his ground in the last
debate,but didn't
go on the attack.
Marco Rubio, also a name I heard
at the polls,
those voters who said that they
liked Marco
Rubio on the Republican side
told me that
they felt he was the most
erectable. They
said they did in fact have
doubts after his
performance in last -- in this
weekend's debate,
but that they're sticking with
him because
they still think in the long run
he's the
one who can beat a Democrat, the
most likely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, from
looking at these
early exit polls we have been
seeing and how
many Republicans voters say they
made up their
minds just in the last few days,
that gives
you a sense of the level of how
unsettled
this race is on the Republican
side.
Lisa, what about on the
Democratic side? What
are you hearing?
LISA DESJARDINS: There, I think
what we have
been talking about, this idea
that Bernie
Sanders has caught fire in New
Hampshire,
it's something that I found just
in the few
polling locations I went to.
But I did voter after voter who
said they
like Bernie Sanders. And I
asked, you know,
what do you think about his
electability?
They said, I'm actually not
thinking about
that. I think he does have as
much of a chance
as Hillary Clinton, but these
voters, Judy,
told me that they are voting
with their heart.
They're not voting
strategically. They are
wanting -- they are voting for
the candidate
that they themselves would put
in office,
whether or not they think that's
the candidate
who is most likely to win in
November.
For many of those voters I
talked to today,
that was Bernie Sanders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Lisa, you were
telling me about some of the
radio and television
spots that are playing there in
New Hampshire
here in the final hours?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
It will be a great sigh of
relief and there
will be many headaches gone
tomorrow when
these ads stop, but, today,
Judy, there have
been even more ads, and some of
them really
even sharper than ever, some of
them getting
into personal lives. I heard one
that was
a very personal attack on Jeb
Bush, and back
and forth between the
candidates, especially
on radio, Judy.
We have talked about some of the
candidates'
TV ads, but the radio ads are
increasingly
personal and increasingly sharp.
And, of course,
if you drop an ad like that
today, it doesn't
give a candidate a chance to
respond. Now,
that seemed to be coming from
the more conservative
wing of the party.
And I think there's something I
want to point
out here, too. When I talked to
Democratic
voters today, Judy, all of them
seemed to
indicate, whether they liked
Bernie Sanders
or Hillary Clinton, that they
would be happy
with either of those candidates
in the end.
Not so on the Republican Party.
And I know
we will get more into this later
into the
show.
Many Republicans here feel this
is a do-or-die
moment for their wing of the
party. They feel
like this is a moment where the
party either
has a future or doesn't, and
that's from both
sides, conservatives and
moderates, both of
them are concerned that the
other side of
the party will gain momentum
here in New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's
something for
us to chew on.
All right, Lisa Desjardins, who
is going to
be dashing from campaign hotel
to campaign
hotel tonight, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, President
Obama sent his eighth and final
budget to
Congress. The $4.1 trillion
blueprint includes
new spending on cyber-security
and cancer
research, and a $10-a-barrel tax
on oil to
pay for transportation needs.
Hours after it arrived at the
Capitol, the
president touted the plan's
benefits at the
White House.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The budget that we're releasing
today reflects
my priorities and the priorities
that I believe
will help advance security and
prosperity
in America for many years to
come. These are
proposals reflected in the
budget that work
for us and not against us.
GWEN IFILL: But Republicans
dismissed the
plan before it even arrived on
Capitol Hill.
Arizona Senator John McCain said
there's not
enough spending for defense. And
Mississippi
Senator Roger Wicker said the
president should
have consulted with GOP leaders
first.
SEN. ROGER WICKER (R),
Mississippi: The president's
new budget, his final budget as
president
of the United States, has
arrived with a resounding
thud here in the Congress of the
United States.
This final budget of the Obama
administration
misses the president's final
opportunity to
reach out and do big things in a
time of divided
government.
GWEN IFILL: Republican leaders
pledged to
release their own budget plan in
the coming
weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The head of U.S.
intelligence
confirmed today that North Korea
has restarted
its plutonium reactor and ramped
up uranium
enrichment. Both are key
components of a nuclear
weapons program.
The director of national
intelligence, James
Clapper, says the North could
begin recovering
plutonium for bomb-making in a
matter of weeks
or months.
GWEN IFILL: In Hong Kong, lunar
new year celebrations
erupted into the worst violence
since 2014,
leaving dozens injured. It
started after police
tried to shut down unlicensed
food vendors.
With that, hundreds of
protesters rushed police
lines, hurling bricks and
swinging sticks.
Officers fought back with batons
and rounds
of pepper spray. They arrested
more than 60
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Safety officials
in Southern
Germany are trying to understand
what caused
a deadly train wreck. The crash
today in Bavaria
killed at least 10 people and
injured scores
more.
Emma Murphy of Independent
Television News
reports from the scene.
EMMA MURPHY: On one of the
safest rail networks
in the world, what's left of two
commuter
trains. They collided at full
speed, just
before 7:00 this morning,
outside the spa
town of Bad Aibling, an hour
from Munich.
It was a head-on collision, both
trains on
the same track, the impact
crushing the front
carriages and flipping others
off the tracks.
This mobile phone footage a
glimpse of the
dreadfulness that greeted
emergency services.
MAN (through translator): You
could hear people
screaming for help. You could
hear how glass
was being broken to help people
get out. And
one by one, people were getting
out, covered
in blood, limping.
EMMA MURPHY: This is the same
route the trains
were on. It's fitted with an
automatic braking
system, which should have
stopped them if
the track wasn't clear. Why it
didn't, whether
through human or technical
failure, is part
of the investigation.
Walking to this site, what
strikes you is
that it's straight all the way,
the rail track
running parallel with the canal,
until you
get to the part where the two
trains collided.
That is where there is something
of a bend.
The trains would have been going
at top speed,
around 60 miles an hour. By the
time they
came out of that bend on the
same track, they
wouldn't have had time to stop.
And the investigation
now must establish why they were
in the same
place at the same time.
The crash happened down a
single-track road
between a canal and forest,
which meant huge
problems for the 700-strong team
of emergency
service staff. Casualties were
put into small
inflatable ribs to be moved to
helicopters
and ambulances in Germany and
Austria.
Dreadful as this day has been,
the only relief
is that more were not killed.
Usually, these
trains would be full of
schoolchildren, but
they were off school today for a
carnival.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One person is
still missing
in the wreckage, but officials
had to call
off the search at nightfall.
GWEN IFILL: Staggering new
numbers today on
the European migrant crisis. The
International
Organization for Migration
reports that more
than 76,000 migrants have
arrived on the continent
by sea just since January 1.
That comes to
nearly 2,000 arrivals a day, and
it's about
10 times more than the same
period last year.
More than 400 people have died
in the crossing
attempt this year, up from 69 at
this same
time last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, Hawaii's
Big Island has declared a state
of emergency
over an outbreak of dengue
fever. There've
been 250 confirmed cases of the
mosquito-borne
illness since late October, the
most since
the 1940s. The state of
emergency allows landfills
to accept old tires, which are
often breeding
spots for mosquitoes.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street
struggled today to
avoid another sell-off. In the
end, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 12
points to
close at 16014. The Nasdaq fell
15 points,
and the S&P 500 dropped one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And thousands of
people had
to brave cold winds in New
Orleans today for
the climax of Mardi Gras.
Despite the chill,
revelers filled the streets of
the Big Easy
to enjoy traditional parades,
elaborate floats
and all the beads they could
catch. The celebrations
mark the culmination of the
Carnival season
as Lent is ushered in.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how New Hampshire
will change the race for the
Republican nomination;
Syrians stranded on the Turkish
border as
government forces bear down on
Aleppo; plus,
a look at Detroit's crumbling
schools.
GWEN IFILL: After the votes are
counted today,
Republicans will be one step
closer to settling
on a nominee. But there may be
even more at
stake, as distinct factions
fight for the
future of the Grand Old Party.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins is back
with that from New Hampshire.
LISA DESJARDINS: The clusters of
signs and
intense campaigning show a
Republican race
that has been unpredictable,
even by New Hampshire
standards.
WOMAN: I'm a volunteer calling
on behalf of
Ted Cruz for president campaign.
LISA DESJARDINS: Phone banks are
in high gear
at Cruz headquarters in
Manchester. Their
candidate may have won Iowa, but
he has not
been the headline here.
The slightly younger senator
from Florida
is. Marco Rubio has seemed to
find his groove
and a big response at his
events.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Hillary Clinton attacks me more
than any other
Republican because she doesn't
want to run
against me, but I can't wait to
run against
her.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: But his
performance at Saturday's
debate has raised a new question
mark.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: This notion
that Barack
Obama doesn't know what he's
doing is just
not true. He knows exactly what
he's doing.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
There it is. There it is, the
memorized 25-second
speech. There it is, everybody.
LISA DESJARDINS: Playing into
ads like this
one from the super PAC
supporting Jeb Bush.
MAN: Repeating the same answer.
MAN: And then he did boy in the
bubble. I
have to go to my robotic talking
points.
LISA DESJARDINS: Rubio has also
been on the
attack.
NARRATOR: Jeb Bush's ideas are
old and wrong.
LISA DESJARDINS: With his super
PAC going
after Bush in one ad.
NARRATOR: What is Canadian about
Ted Cruz?
His tax plan.
LISA DESJARDINS: After Ted Cruz
in another.
NARRATOR: Chris Christie could
well be Obama's
favorite Republican governor.
LISA DESJARDINS: Chris Christie
in still one
more.
Rubio has found himself in the
middle of a
much larger party divide here in
New Hampshire.
While, in Iowa, some 85 percent
of Republicans
call themselves conservative,
here in New
Hampshire, roughly half of
Republicans identify
as moderate or liberal. That
makes this vote
not just a fight between
candidates, but between
opposing party philosophies.
STEVE MAC DONALD, GrokTALK!:
Welcome to another
edition of GrokTALK!. It is
February already.
Steve Mac Donald hosts
GrokTALK!. It's a home-grown
conservative radio show in
Concord that is
actively supporting Ted Cruz.
Mac Donald actually
embraces the label "extreme,"
because he says
Republicans in office, like
Rubio and Chris
Christie, have become
compromised.
STEVE MAC DONALD: We are extreme
because we
believe in smaller government,
local control.
We'd rather keep the money here
and go talk
to our legislators and our town
councils about
how to spend the money. And
there is an extreme
difference in that philosophy,
and that's
why extremist is an appropriate
word.
LISA DESJARDINS: But these
Republicans see
the word extremist as the
problem.
Renee Plummer is here to win
business votes
for Chris Christie, along with
his wife, Mary
Pat.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: There are
some people
who, based on their life
experience, their
work experience, their
experience in public
life, are prepared and ready to
take on Hillary
Clinton and then become
president of the United
States. And some people are not.
LISA DESJARDINS: Christie is
considered establishment
by some, and Plummer says that
shouldn't be
a bad thing.
RENEE PLUMMER, Real Estate
Developer: When
you talk about the Constitution,
the Declaration
of Independence, the Bill of
Rights, you're
talking about establishment. At
some point,
something has to be established.
LISA DESJARDINS: Plummer is a
real estate
developer. At her home in
Portsmouth, she
shows me photos of the must-do
luncheons that
she hosts for nearly every
candidate.
RENEE PLUMMER: So, Governor
Scott Walker was
the first one.
LISA DESJARDINS: She fears that
the right
wing of the party only wants
control, not
results or compromise.
RENEE PLUMMER: I think people
become very
selfish, you know? They want
their small group
to be the ones that are going to
dominate.
How are you going to govern if
you think that
your group is right, and
everybody else is
wrong? It's not going to work.
LISA DESJARDINS: Dante Scala is
a professor
at the University of New
Hampshire who's written
a book on the Republican divide.
He says the 2016 GOP fight
highlights a real
problem for the party and its
presidential
candidates.
DANTE SCALA, University of New
Hampshire:
So, the Republicans are
grappling with both
left-right divisions, but then
in vs. out.
And so that's complicating
things. So, Republicans
have become very good at
building a coalition
of voters that excels in
midterms, when the
electorate is older and whiter,
but they are
having real problems building a
coalition
that can win presidential
elections.
LISA DESJARDINS: Here's what the
divide means
in today's primary. The hard
right is pushing
for Cruz and Ben Carson, but
that's just 20
percent of Republicans here. The
bigger group
in New Hampshire is moderates.
Fighting for those votes are
three governors,
John Kasich, Christie and Bush.
Hoping to
gain from both sides are
hard-to-define Donald
Trump and Rubio, who is both
conservative
and established. This all makes
for a particularly
wild intraparty fight for
voters, from moderates.
PAUL EDMONDS, New Hampshire
Voter: It's directionally
incorrect with the guys like
Trump and Cruz,
I think. You need -- quote --
"more establishment"
kind of guys like Kasich and
Christie or Bush.
LISA DESJARDINS: To Trump
voters.
CYNDI TUITE, New Hampshire
Voter: It needs
somebody that's got some balls,
who is not
a regular politician, and can
get this country
back on course.
LISA DESJARDINS: To
conservatives.
ROBERT HODGMAN, New Hampshire
Voter: This
country is slipping away from
the Constitution
very rapidly. And if we don't
win this election,
we're going to have a lot of
problems.
LISA DESJARDINS: And to the
seemingly many
late-deciders.
RICHARD TUITE, New Hampshire
Voter: Actually,
I really don't have to make up
my mind yet.
LISA DESJARDINS: New Hampshire
has been a
sprint for candidates to try and
stay in the
Republican race, and it's a test
likely to
swing at the last minute.
In Manchester for the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Lisa Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: We look at what's at
stake for
both Republicans and Democrats
now with Tamara
Keith of NPR, who joins us from
Manchester,
and Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report,
who is here with me.
So, Tam, in these last days
going into the
way this whole thing is sorted
out, who seems
-- which candidate seems the
most nervous
tonight?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Hmm.
I think that's a very good
question.
Well, I think a lot of -- on the
Democratic
side, Hillary Clinton doesn't
have a lot of
nervousness, because there's a
resignation
to the way things are going to
turn out. It's
about the margin of victory for
Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders.
On the Republican side, I think
that someone
like Chris Christie has to be
hoping that
something will happen. John
Kasich has been
relaxed out on the trail today.
So, it's -- and
Donald Trump, he probably has a
lot to be
nervous about, because he has
been -- he has
these huge poll numbers, but, in
Iowa, that
didn't translate into a win, and
he sure has
to hope to get a win tonight.
GWEN IFILL: It's really
interesting.
Amy, we have seen first wave of
exit polls
today from today's voting, which
tells us
a lot about who voted and when
they vote -- when
they decided to vote.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
So, I'm looking for a lot of
things in these
exit polls, but one of the most
interesting
is the independent voters,
people who do not
define themselves as Democrat or
Republican.
They can vote in these primaries
as long as
they pick one ballot.
And on the Republican side, 42
percent of
the people who turned out to
vote identified
as Republican -- I'm sorry -- as
independent;
39 percent on the Democratic
side identified
as independent.
GWEN IFILL: Pretty close.
AMY WALTER: That's pretty close.
The news
for Kasich -- and I agree with
Tamara -- he
is hoping for a good night here
-- he needs
a big turnout among
independents.
In 2012, the turnout among
independents was
almost 50 percent. Back in 2008,
it was 37
percent. So, it's somewhere
right in the middle
there. It's probably a good
number for Kasich.
The question is if it is good
enough.
And then the other question
about who is nervous
tonight, Marco Rubio has to be
very, very
nervous. He came into Iowa with
a head of
steam. As we saw in this report,
he's been
struggling since the debate to
get that momentum
back. If he falls behind a
Kasich, a Jeb in
this primary, it's going to be a
very difficult
pivot for him to say that he's
the candidate
now who has the momentum going
into South
Carolina.
GWEN IFILL: As we saw, everybody
says they're
going to South Carolina, but
that doesn't
necessarily mean they're all
going to South
Carolina.
Tamara, you know, we were in New
Hampshire
in 1992, when Bill Clinton
declared himself
the comeback kid. We were there
in 2008, where
it looked like all the polls
showed that Barack
Obama was going to win, and he
didn't. Hillary
Clinton did.
What going into -- behind you in
the scene
-- set there is the Trump bus,
by the way.
I'm just letting you know.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: What, going into
tonight's voting
and tonight's vote-counting, are
we watching
for, for a comeback?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, this
morning, I interviewed
a couple of voters at a polling
place who
said that they had heard from
the Hillary
Clinton campaign, got knocks on
their doors
while they were still in
pajamas.
So, the Clinton campaign is
definitely still
efforting this and trying to get
people out.
But I asked one of her campaign
officials,
what are you looking for? What
are you hoping
for? There was no hint of hoping
for a win.
It was all about how -- whether
maybe they
could get the win for Vermont
Senator Bernie
Sanders into single digits,
maybe.
AMY WALTER: And there is
something telling
about the fact that Hillary
Clinton went up
today with an ad in South
Carolina talking
about racial injustice and
systemic racism,
not a very -- not a subtle
shift, we're talking.
GWEN IFILL: So, the strategy for
the Hillary
Clinton people have -- they have
already...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: They are basically,
like, let's
just go into South Carolina,
where we know
the terrain is much more
comfortable for us.
We know that we're going to have
to win over
African-American voters, do very
well among
this group.
She's already been running an ad
featuring
former Attorney General Eric
Holder, now going
in with this on police violence
and other
issues.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, one of the big
names coming
out of Iowa only a week ago was
Ted Cruz.
But we haven't heard as much
about him in
this New Hampshire week. Where
has he been,
and where is he expected to
land?
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, this is less
familiar,
less friendly territory for him.
He really
has been running as an
evangelical in Iowa,
which is a great thing in Iowa.
Here in New Hampshire, voters
have different
sensibilities. And he has been
really trying
to lower expectations heading
into this vote.
I think that his campaign really
believes
that they have strengths in the
states that
come after this, in the Southern
states, in
South Carolina. I think that
they feel like
they will be on much more
friendly terrain
once they get out of New
Hampshire.
GWEN IFILL: And speaking of
South Carolina,
you mentioned what Hillary
Clinton was already
doing on the air there, Amy. We
heard today
that Bernie Sanders is meeting
tomorrow in
New York with Al Sharpton.
Obviously, people are beginning
to change
their approach to this.
AMY WALTER: That's right. We're
going from
Iowa, New Hampshire,
overwhelmingly white
states, not diverse at all, now
into Southern
states like South Carolina. We
will go to
Nevada as well, which is very
heavily Latino,
and then into some of these
Southern states.
The terrain changes. It's
supposed to be a
better terrain for Hillary
Clinton on a whole
bunch of measures, but
demography being the
most important.
GWEN IFILL: I saw in one of
these exit polls,
Amy, that a lot of people who
self-described
themselves as liberals were
involved -- a
lot of self-described liberals
voted in this
election. Does that change, as
well, also
as they leave New Hampshire?
AMY WALTER: I think, as we leave
New Hampshire
and even as we leave Iowa, we're
going to
get to a more moderate
electorate.
But I think what is different
even this year
than it was in 2008, certainly
when we saw
the comeback kid in 1992, the
Democratic electorate
is much more liberal than it has
been at any
previous point. And so this has
been the challenge
for Hillary Clinton, trying to
keep up with
a party that keeps moving to the
left. It's
not the party that it was back
in the '90s.
GWEN IFILL: And, Tam, does the
more moderate
electorate in New Hampshire also
speak to
one part of the reason why John
Kasich at
least is the subject of buzz,
whether he will
be the subject of votes tonight?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, that, and
that independents
can vote in a different party.
And I think John Kasich's recipe
here is that
he would pull Democratic-leaning
independents
to vote for him here. This is a
place that's
really a sweet spot for him,
where some of
his positions on, like,
expanding Medicaid
and things like that wouldn't
necessarily
be as much of a problem for him
as in some
other places.
GWEN IFILL: OK, nose to the
grindstone up
there in New Hampshire tonight.
Thanks for joining us, Tam.
And thank you here in
Washington, Amy Walter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we break
down some
interesting facts and figures
from New Hampshire
that aren't voting results.
Here's Hari Sreenivasan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Our data team
looked at
what the numbers say about New
Hampshire going
into tonight's primary results.
How does the
Granite State compare to the
rest of the country,
and, on social media, what are
New Hampshirites
saying about this year's
presidential election?
Compared to Iowa and most of the
country,
New Hampshire is whiter and more
wealthy,
according to the Census Bureau;
94 percent
of the voting-age population is
white, vs.
66 percent of the U.S. And the
median household
income is $66,532. That's
$12,000 more than
the amount you find nationwide.
In fact, there are fewer people
in poverty
in New Hampshire as well. The
national poverty
rate is nearly 14 percent,
almost twice as
high as what's found in New
Hampshire, slightly
more than 8 percent. And they're
more politically
active. Among New Hampshire
residents age
18 or older, the census says
nearly three
out of four are registered to
vote, compared
to about two out of three
Americans.
But what's on the minds of New
Hampshire voters
as this year's election gains
momentum? Just
like in Iowa last week, Facebook
users in
this small New England state
have more to
say about Donald Trump than any
other presidential
contender, Republican or
Democrat. Next, there's
Ted Cruz, who won last week's
Iowa GOP caucus,
and then Marco Rubio and Jeb
Bush.
The presidential race's two
Democrats, Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders,
follow Trump in
generating interest on Facebook
there.
Regarding issues that most
concern New Hampshire
voters, conversation on Facebook
may offer
some clues. Campaign finance is
the most important
topic among Facebook users in
New Hampshire
leading up to today's primary
vote. Next,
New Hampshirites are talking
about taxes,
the economy, Wall Street, and
same-sex marriage.
And when New Hampshirites want
to learn more
about this year's candidates,
what are they
Googling? According to the
search engine's
News Lab, interest in Rubio
peaked after his
debate performance Saturday, and
top-trending
questions among New Hampshire
residents include,
is Marco Rubio Catholic and is
Ben Carson
pro-choice?
In an effort to influence the
hearts and minds,
campaign and special interest
groups are buying
lots of ads in New Hampshire.
The Boston Globe
reported that, since December,
more ads have
aired in New Hampshire both for
and against
Jeb Bush than anyone else.
Interestingly,
Ted Cruz was featured in the
fewest ads.
Tonight's vote in New England
will show if
those ad dollars make a
difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks, Hari.
And that brings us to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David
Brooks, who joins us from
Manchester.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, David, we were just hearing
in that report
from Hari how different the
voters of New
Hampshire are from the rest of
the country.
When you look at Iowa and you
put it together
with New Hampshire, you are
looking at a different
group of the electorate. So,
what are you
looking for these voters to
clarify tonight?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Obviously,
they're polarized.
They're whiter, but then they're
also more
polarized.
What's interesting to me is,
this electorate,
according to the exit polls, are
more polarized
than they were in '08. The
Democrats are much
more liberal, significantly more
liberal than
they were in '08. The
Republicans are significantly
more who say they extremely
conservative than
in '12 and '08.
So, this is an electorate, like
a lot of people
around the country, who have
polarized. I'm
also struck by how many
late-deciders there
are. If it's half late-deciders,
that means
all that we have been talking
about in the
polls, I would be very surprised
if we weren't
very surprised by what happens
in the next
few hours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, what about
that, the
late-deciders, and also the
difference? Well,
and let me ask you first about
the late-deciders.
What does that tell you?
MARK SHIELDS: The late-deciders
tell me that
it's typical New Hampshire,
where you get
-- in the last 72 hours, 48
hours, you get
up to half of the voters
deciding.
And one measurement I saw
reported is that
two-thirds of the voters said
that the debates,
which were last Thursday for the
Democrats,
last Saturday for the
Republicans, influenced
their decision in that late
decision.
So, I think that will be a major
part of the
postmortem of the results
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, what
about this
question of, what are you
looking for the
results in New Hampshire to
clarify? I mean,
this is a different group of
voters from the
rest of the country.
MARK SHIELDS: It's a different
group of voters,
Judy. It has always been a
different group
of voters. It is the gateway and
the gatekeeper
state.
Of the last 10 presidents of the
United States,
from Harry Truman forward,
Dwight Eisenhower
to Barack Obama, nobody has been
elected president
of the United States who
finished lower than
second in the New Hampshire
primary or won
it, either won it or finished
second.
So, maybe history will be broken
tonight,
and somebody who finishes fourth
will go on
to be the nominee. But history
is a very strong
indication that, if you don't
finish in the
top two in New Hampshire, you're
not going
to have an inaugural parade next
January 20.
So, I think that's what I'm
looking for as
much as anything.
I would also look for, quite
frankly, Marco
Rubio, who was running second in
the polls
immediately after Iowa and a
stronger-than-expected
showing, if, in fact, he does
tumble to beyond
fourth, or third, fifth in this
tonight, I
think the story has already been
written.
The narrative is there. It was
the debate
that did it to him, just as
Howard Dean's
scream in 2004 became the
explanation for
his fall from grace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David,
that's a reminder
that, tonight, we don't just
look at who the
winners are in each party. We're
going to
be looking closely at who comes
in second,
third and maybe even fourth.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
There's the results, and then
there's the
narrative. And the narratives
will be determined
by the size of the victory. If
Donald Trump,
his final poll numbers around
31, if he's
down around 25, 24, 22, then we
will have
a pattern of underperformance.
If he's above
31, then suddenly he looks quite
strong.
If John Kasich comes in second,
suddenly,
we have got fresh meat. We have
got a new
story to talk about. If Bernie
Sanders can
win -- right now, he's winning
by like 15
in the polls. And -- but if he
wins by 25,
suddenly, that's a huge story.
If somehow
he loses, he's done.
And so we will -- the gaps
between all the
candidates will determine the
narrative structure
over the next few weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, are you
hearing from
these candidates an evolving
message? Do you
hear them saying the same kinds
of things
they were weeks ago? Or do you
see something
developing from these candidates
that tells
us more about them?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, Donald
Trump evolves
in random ways, but I don't know
that that's
developing.
What's interesting is how much
-- you know,
the polls to me about
immigration on the Republican
side are very disturbing.
Two-thirds of Republicans
here would like to have a
temporary ban on
all Muslims. On the other hand,
immigration
is not a very salient issue.
It's not one
of the top concerns. Economy is
really the
top concern on both sides.
And on the Republican side,
Kasich and Trump
are getting the highest ratings
on the economy.
So, they focus on that. But I
guess the thing
that's most interesting to me,
as in the whole
campaign, is the electorate is
more interesting
than the candidates.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: There are a lot of
people who
are Democrats who just want to
stop Cruz or
stop Trump, so they're switching
over to vote
on the Republican side, even
though they might
be progressives themselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is
interesting, Mark, the
number of -- what we have been
hearing reporters
say. They talk to voters who
say, well, I'm
either going to go Trump or
Sanders, or they
will name a Democrat or a
Republican.
MARK SHIELDS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are we
learning in this
process about just how unhappy
the American
people are? Do we better
understand the appeal
of these outsider candidates?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think
Trump and Sanders,
you could say they -- these are
very much
outsider candidates, I mean, who
are politics
as usual, Washington, the
political establishment
-- they give cold comfort to
members of that
group or that organization. They
are both
outsiders. They're both highly
critical. They
-- I think that is a major
thing.
Just one point about New
Hampshire, Judy.
Today, they had a snowstorm.
They will have
a turnout in New Hampshire, if
history is
our guide again, that will be
higher than
all but 44 states in November, I
mean, in
a primary in February.
I mean, these are people who
take it seriously,
take their responsibility
seriously. And,
I mean, they really do a rather
remarkable
job. So, their decision is --
has to be paid
attention to, and it will have
enormous implications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
paying attention.
David, you mentioned -- we were
talking about
Trump a minute ago. There's been
a lot of
coverage today of the remark
that he made
last night which everyone has
bleeped out,
at least all the news
organizations have bleeped
out. And yet the crowd cheered.
What do we learn from that?
DAVID BROOKS: Part of his appeal
is anti-political
correctness.
He understands that to show that
you're against
the establishment is not only to
show it on
positions. You show it on
manners. And, so,
in my view, he's taken the
manners of professional
wrestling. He's in the
Professional Wrestling
Hall of Fame, and he's brought
it to politics.
And so the word he used last
night was another
-- yet another example of that.
And people
like me tut-tut about it, but
the crowd cheered.
There is a certain number of
people who say,
well, that's how I talk, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, should we
draw bigger
conclusions or just say, this is
just one
rally, one Donald Trump remark?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, if Donald
Trump wins,
as the polls predict that he
will, I mean,
he has to be taken more
seriously, Judy.
And this is such a departure
from how Americans
regard their presidents, whether
it's George
Washington or Abraham Lincoln or
anybody who
served in that office. We expect
a level of
civility. We expect a level of
discourse.
And Donald Trump, by any
measurement, is not
presidential by that standard.
And I think there's matter of
taste, as well
as sensibilities, that he
offends an awful
lot of people. I will be
interested in the
exit polls and how many people
who don't vote
for Donald Trump tonight have an
unfavorable
view of him. Remember, in Iowa,
a majority
of Republicans who didn't
support Donald Trump
had an unfavorable view of him.
And that, of course, would, I
think, be a
reflection of his manner, his
approach, his
attitude, his disparagement of
his opponents,
and just calling everybody who
has ever served
in Washington in the past
generation stupid.
And that -- I think that there
are consequences
to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David, just
quickly, does
this campaign feels -- we have
been saying
this for months, that this
campaign feels
like a different one.
Do you go into tonight's voting,
tonight's
results still feeling that this
is -- this
stands out as something really
different from
what we have seen over the past
few decades
of this?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. We have...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
DAVID BROOKS: We have certainly
broken every
rule of etiquette. We have
certainly had the
confusion of candidates.
I guess I'm mostly struck by how
nothing will
be settled. We may be more
confused tomorrow
than we are today if we get
another scramble
of new candidates, a Kasich or a
Bush rising.
And, so, usually, there's a
winnowing and
a clarifying. We may be more
confused after
New Hampshire, at least on the
Republican
side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: And we will find
out, Judy,
whether, in fact, there is such
a thing as
a firewall after tonight. If, in
fact, Bernie
Sanders wins big, if he gets the
big mo' of
legendary American political
lore, and starts
to move, and even in areas where
he's unknown
previously.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we look
forward to having
Mark and David with us all
evening.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you.
And stay with us. We will have a
lot more
on the New Hampshire primary on
our "PBS NewsHour"
special report. That's at 11:00
p.m. Eastern.
Plus, tune in on Thursday. Gwen
and I will
moderate the Democratic
presidential debate,
in partnership with Facebook,
from the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. That
starts Thursday
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern.
GWEN IFILL: American
intelligence officials
told a Senate hearing today that
Russia's
bombing campaign in Syria has
stabilized the
regime of President Bashar
al-Assad and turned
the tide of the five-year civil
war against
U.S.-backed rebel forces.
That is most apparent in Aleppo
in Northern
Syria, where tens of thousands
have fled as
the Syrian army closes in.
William Brangham reports.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is
everyday Aleppo
now. Sirens wail as rescue crews
rush to the
scene of yet another airstrike,
believed to
be the work of Russian
warplanes.
WOMAN (through translator): We
have the planes
over us. We have the rockets
over us. We are
dying. We are left with nothing,
but our clothes.
We want to be at ease. We want
our dignity.
It's been five years of living
under bombs,
crying, "Oh, God."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Syrian
government troops,
backed by a barrage of Russian
airstrikes,
are fighting their way closer
and closer to
Aleppo. The United Nations warns
that 300,000
people are at risk of being
trapped inside
what was once Syria's largest
city.
Rami Jarrah is a Syrian
journalist and activist
now in Istanbul, Turkey. He was
in Aleppo
just two weeks ago, and spoke
with us today
via Skype.
RAMI JARRAH, Syrian Journalist:
In the center
of the city, what we are seeing
is an escalation,
so, mainly the marketplaces, the
local, heavily
populated residential areas are
being attacked.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As a result,
the World Food
Program reported today that
conditions are
rapidly getting worse.
BETTINA LUESCHER, World Food
Program: We are
extremely concerned about the
situation on
the ground. We are worried about
access and
supply routes from the north to
eastern Aleppo
that have been cut off. We are
making every
effort to get food to the
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Desperate to
escape, tens
of thousands of Syrians are
trying to flee
the short, but difficult
distance north to
Turkey, only to find the border
cordoned off.
WILLIAM SPINDLER, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: Many people are
not being allowed
to cross the border, and we are
asking Turkey
to open its border to all
civilians from Syria
who are fleeing danger and
seeking international
protection.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Over the last
few years,
the Turks have already taken in
some 2.5 million
Syrian refugees. Turkey's
foreign minister
said today his government has
started taking
in some of the 50,000 Syrians
massed at the
border, but he warned that
influx could become
a torrent.
MEVLUT CAVUSOGLU, Turkish
Foreign Minister
(through translator): We
admitted 10,000,
but for the others, we will set
up camps on
the other side of the border. We
can only
let them through in a controlled
fashion.
If airstrikes continue, the
refugee flood
could reach 100,000 or even one
million.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Russia
insisted today there
is no credible evidence that its
airstrikes
have caused civilian deaths.
But Rami Jarrah says the view on
the ground
in Aleppo is decidedly
different.
RAMI JARRAH: There is extreme
fear amongst
the civilians there. They are
totally disabling
the movement there. So, if there
is any small
form of commerce or sort of
business trade
that is happening in these areas
that people
can live off, they are also
destroying that.
And they are scaring the rest of
the civilians
there.
They are willing to hit
hospitals, willing
to hit local councils, aid
communities, the
civil defense, for example. Then
they are
willing to kill anyone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Underscoring
that point,
a humanitarian group calling
itself Syria
Civil Defense posted these
images online showing
the aftermath of a Russian
attack on a refugee
camp in northern Aleppo. At
least five people
were killed.
The fierce bombardment has also
taken a heavy
toll elsewhere, according to
humanitarian
activist Mohammad Al-Hamseh.
He's witnessed
the scope of Russia's aerial
onslaught firsthand
farther south in the town of
Talbiseh, near
the city of Homs.
MOHAMMAD AL-HAMSEH, Humanitarian
Activist
(through translator): Russian
planes are bombarding
in the morning and evening,
inflicting damage
to civilians here. They are
killing and hurting
civilians daily and also bombing
what are
supposed to be safe areas in the
town of Talbiseh.
In regards to the humanitarian
situation,
it is very, very bad. There is
no way for
any food or supplies to reach
this area, from
sugar to flour to oil or
gasoline.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Faced with
this escalation,
the U.N.-backed Syrian peace
talks in Geneva
stalled last week.
In Washington today, U.S.
Secretary of State
John Kerry said Moscow's
military campaign
in Syria has jeopardized any
prospect for
peace.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: Russia's
activities in Aleppo and in the
region right
now are making it much more
difficult to be
able to come to the table and be
able to have
a serious conversation. And we
have called
on Russia, and we call on Russia
again, to
join in the effort to bring
about an immediate
cease-fire and to bring about
full humanitarian
access.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, to Detroit,
and a city
school system in turmoil,
plagued with decrepit
buildings, financial
uncertainty, a chronic
lack of resources, and now a
recent wave of
teacher sick-outs.
All of it is fueling a growing
anxiety that
the system could run out of
money in coming
months.
April Brown has our report. It's
part of our
Making the Grade series, which
airs every
Tuesday.
Tonight's story is in
partnership with the
American Graduate Initiative.
APRIL BROWN: The playground at
Detroit's Spain
Elementary and Middle School sat
empty for
weeks. No children were allowed
in because
of this.
LAKIA WILSON, Counselor, Spain
Elementary
and Middle School: We started to
call it a
steam geyser, because we really
don't know
what it is, if you notice that
there is steam
coming out there. There is also
some liquid
that is spewing out from it. So
it's very
dangerous because it causes the
temperatures
on the playground to reach 110
degrees.
APRIL BROWN: Lakia Wilson is the
counselor
at Spain, a school with a
century-long legacy
in this Detroit neighborhood.
But for the
last two years, she says, steam
and water,
reportedly from the sewer
system, have been
seeping out of the concrete in
the parking
lot and shooting out of this
pipe a few feet
away.
This is your only playground?
LAKIA WILSON: This is our own
only playground.
We have lost our gym, and we
have no playground
now.
APRIL BROWN: What do your kids
do for exercise
now?
LAKIA WILSON: Our children are
limited to
walking the hallway. They have
become like
mall walkers.
APRIL BROWN: The gym she
referred to is now
locked. But before that
happened, a few cameras
captured what is there.
How would you describe what we
see inside?
LAKIA WILSON: A scary movie. The
floor has
been removed, the parquet. And
now what you
see is just a layer of
blackness. We have
been told that it was black
mold. In fact,
the city inspector said that it
was mold.
APRIL BROWN: Teachers and staff
say they have
had building issues for years,
including mold,
water damage, and broken
windows, some of
which city inspectors recently
cited as code
violations.
India Brimberry, the school's
student health
aide, is among those concerned
these problems
are affecting the health of
those who work
and study here.
INDIA BRIMBERRY, Spain
Elementary and Middle
School: I see a lot of
nosebleeds, a lot of
vomiting and stomach aches, a
lot of headaches
every day.
APRIL BROWN: The conditions at
Spain, along
with structural and maintenance
problems at
other schools in the Detroit
Public School
District, came to light last
month, after
more than 80 were closed because
of the most
recent in a series of teacher
sick-outs over
working conditions.
Soon afterward, the mayor
ordered nearly all
the city's schools be inspected.
This is one of the first schools
city inspectors
came to. Cody houses three
separate high schools,
and here the inspectors found 30
violations,
including mold, mildew and
evidence of rodents
and insects.
The Detroit Institute of
Technology, a college
prep school located at Cody, is
where Christal
Bonner teaches. She was among a
group of teachers,
parents and students who wanted
to share their
many experiences with issues
including large
class sizes and few resources in
a district
that may soon run out of money.
CHRISTAL BONNER, Teacher,
Detroit Institute
of Technology: How can you call
yourself Detroit
Institute of Technology when
your technology
is nonexistent or very low? We
just have some
outdated regular desktop dells.
And we have
some old, outdated netbooks, and
in a couple
of rooms, you might have a smart
board. That's
it.
APRIL BROWN: Eighteen-year-old
Lucas Beal
is a senior at Communication and
Media Arts
High School a few miles away.
LUCAS BEAL, Student: In my math
class, there
are not enough textbooks. And
some of the
pages are missing, so we have to
try to scramble
around and find the books with
that page,
try to take a picture of the
problems we have
to do.
APRIL BROWN: At yet another high
school, Cass
Technical, senior Ashley Carson
is among a
group of students there who
organized a walkout
both to support teachers and
protest the poor
conditions.
She says that, even though the
physical conditions
at Cass Tech aren't as bad as
some others,
having so few resources is
demoralizing.
ASHLEY CARSON, Student: It's
kind of like
you feel like you're the --
like, the bottom
of the barrel. You feel like
we're not worth
anything. We may know
differently, but what
they're showing us is not that
we're worth
something.
APRIL BROWN: Arlyssa Heard
pulled her son
out of a Detroit public school,
but is still
concerned about what's
happening.
ARLYSSA HEARD, Parent: How long
can you go
year after year with not getting
what you
need, without not having an
assistant in the
classroom, overcrowded classes,
not enough
supplies, no prep time?
WOMAN: I would love to ask the
teacher in
the room, how do you keep going
in DPS?
CHRISTAL BONNER: Well, good
question. I guess
I keep going because the
students say, Ms.
Bonner, are you coming back next
year?
APRIL BROWN: Bonner has stayed
in the classroom,
but many other teachers have
quit. And after
January's large-scale teacher
sick-out by
many who remained, the district
sued to stop
similar protests in the future.
The district's head of
communications, Michelle
Zdrodowski.
MICHELLE ZDRODOWSKI,
Communications Director,
Detroit Public Schools: We
understand the
teachers' frustration. We're all
frustrated.
We feel the same things that
teachers feel.
But, ultimately, the important
thing is that
teachers are in the classroom
teaching. When
you close 88 schools on one day,
that doesn't
help kids.
WOMAN: Educators have been
snubbed.
APRIL BROWN: The teachers union
next announced
it was filing suit against the
district, alleging
it is not providing a minimally
adequate education
or properly maintaining the
schools.
Ivy Bailey is the interim
president of the
Detroit Federation of Teachers:
IVY BAILEY, Interim President,
Detroit Federation
of Teachers: You shouldn't have
to worry about,
if you're going to come to
school, if water
is going to be dripping on your
head. You
shouldn't have to worry about if
you're breathing
in mold spores. You shouldn't
have to worry
about if there's going to be a
teacher sitting
in front of you when you get to
school.
APRIL BROWN: But district
officials say they
have been trying their best to
solve the problems.
MICHELLE ZDRODOWSKI: When there
are life and
safety issues, we have done our
best to address
those as quickly as possible.
Bigger picture
issues like roofs that need --
complete roofs
that need replacing, we just
don't have the
funds for right now.
APRIL BROWN: The poor conditions
have contributed
to educational achievement which
the mayor
described last week as the
worst-performing
of any large city in America.
The district's financial
situation has been
declining for more than a
decade, along with
its enrollment, which plummeted
from more
than 140,000 in 2005 to about
47,000 a decade
later. At the same time, revenue
has dropped
from roughly $1.4 billion to
less than $800
million. And now expenditures
exceed revenue.
The district is now on the brink
of insolvency,
with more than $500 million of
debt. Emergency
managers effectively took
control away from
the local school board in 2009.
GOV. RICK SNYDER (R), Michigan:
I think it's
critically important we improve
education
in Detroit.
APRIL BROWN: Michigan Governor
Rick Snyder
appointed the most recent,
Darnell Earley,
a year ago to improve the
district's financial
footing.
But Earley has recently been
under fire for
his tenure as the emergency
manager in Flint,
Michigan, when the city switched
its water
supply in a cost-cutting
measure, which resulted
in lead contamination and a
public health
crisis.
Earley resigned last week, but
is still in
his post until the end of
February.
May I ask why Mr. Earley is not
available?
MICHELLE ZDRODOWSKI: He's doing
the work of
the district.
APRIL BROWN: Detroit Public
Schools head of
communications Michelle
Zdrodowski:
MICHELLE ZDRODOWSKI: Well, as an
emergency
manager, he was responsible for
coming in
and addressing the financial
emergency. If
you look at our audit report
from fiscal year
'15, it shows that, were it not
for the $515
million in long-term debt, we
would have had
a $13 million surplus.
APRIL BROWN: But Earley has
acknowledged the
district will run out of cash in
April. Governor
Snyder says he plans to appoint
a transitional
leader for Detroit Public
Schools before the
end of the month.
Pending legislation could take
care of the
$515 million debt and offer
millions more
for restructuring, but there are
also concerns
the district could file for
bankruptcy instead.
LUCAS BEAL: You could suspend
me, but either
way, though, I still walked out.
You still
heard me.
APRIL BROWN: Lucas Beal hopes
the situation
is addressed in time to benefit
younger students,
because he doesn't expect it
will be in time
to help him.
LUCAS BEAL: I'm currently a
senior, so I'm
about to go off. And I might
know half of
the stuff that I need, and I
might not because
of the lack of resources.
APRIL BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm April
Brown in Detroit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Updating the
day's top stories:
The presidential hopefuls are
waiting for
the results from the year's
first primary.
Polls close in New Hampshire at
8:00 p.m.
Eastern.
And this evening, the U.S.
Supreme Court has
blocked President Obama's plan
to curb carbon
dioxide emissions from power
plants until
legal challenges are resolved;
27 states and
industry groups want the
regulation struck
down.
GWEN IFILL: Later tonight, on
most PBS stations,
don't miss "The Fantasy Sports
Gamble." "Frontline"
teams up with The New York Times
to investigate
the phenomenon of online fantasy
sports sites,
exploring, among other things,
whether playing
constitutes gambling.
On the "NewsHour" online:
There's a reason
the newest generation of
Democratic voters
aren't connecting with Hillary
Clinton the
same way older Democrats have,
and it's not
just Bernie Sanders. We talked
to younger
voters in New Hampshire to find
out how they
view the former secretary of
state. That's
on our home page.
You will also find the latest
results from
today's New Hampshire voting and
a calendar
of upcoming primaries and
debates, all that
and more on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
Join Gwen and me later at 11:00
p.m. Eastern
for our special live coverage of
the results
of the New Hampshire primary.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and see you later
tonight.